Before launching a data science practice or initiative,
it is wise to be strategic about how to organize
that data science practice within the larger business organization.
I favor specifying organizational models for
data science in a way that reflects the current business organization,
as well as the role of data science within that organization.
In general, I see four key components
that characterize how best to organize the data science function.
The first of these is,
who is the ultimate owner of the resources?
Are resources owned and managed via
a central organization or via decentralized business units?
The second is more specific to resource allocation.
How are resources allocated and deployed throughout the organization?
Third, who is in charge of those allocations?
In turn, who is in charge of
determining which initiatives receive the green light for funding?
C-suite executives, functional business leaders, business unit heads?
Finally, who is in control of the strategic agenda of the company?
Is this centralized or decentralized?
Is strategy developed in the executive leadership group,
or is it found in functional units throughout the company?
These four issues together guide decisions around organizational models for data science.